Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright ©2026. All
rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026.
CHAPTER
3 N-gram Language Models
“You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with a smile of associating and now
and then I bowed and they perceived a chaise and four to wish for.
Random sentence generated from a Jane Austen trigram model
Predicting is difficult—especially about the future, as the old quip goes. But how
about predicting something that seems much easier, like the next word someone is
going to say? What word, for example, is likely to follow
The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ...
You might conclude that a likely word is blue, or green, or clear, but probably
not refrigerator nor this. In this chapter we formalize this intuition by intro-
ducing n-gram language models or LMs. A language model is a machine learninglanguage model
LM model that predicts upcoming words. More formally, a language model assigns a
probability to each possible next word, or equivalently gives a probability distribu-
tion over possible next words. Language models can also assign a probability to an
entire sentence. Thus an LM could tell us that the following sequence has a much
higher probability of appearing in a text:
all of a sudden I notice three guys standing on the sidewalk
than does this same set of words in a different order:
on guys all I of notice sidewalk three a sudden standing the
Why would we want to predict upcoming words? The main reason is that large
language models are built just by training them to predict words!! As we’ll see
in chapters 5-9, large language models learn an enormous amount about language
solely from being trained to predict upcoming words from neighboring words.
This probabilistic knowledge can be very practical. Consider correcting gram-
mar or spelling errors like Their are two midterms, in which There was mistyped
as Their, or Everything has improve, in which improve should have been
improved. The phrase There are is more probable than Their are, and has
improved than has improve, so a language model can help users select the more
grammatical variant.
Or for a speech system to recognize that you said I will be back soonish
and not I will be bassoon dish, it helps to know that back soonish is a more
probable sequence. Language models can also help in augmentative and alterna-
tive communication (Trnka et al. 2007, Kane et al. 2017). People can use AACAAC
systems if they are physically unable to speak or sign but can instead use eye gaze
or other movements to select words from a menu. Word prediction can be used to
suggest likely words for the menu.
In this chapter we introduce the simplest kind of language model: the n-gramn-gram
