Shikshan Sanshodhan : Journal of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences            ISSN(o): 2581-6241     
Monthly, Peer-Reviewed, Refereed, Indexed Journal                                              Impact Factor:  6.831                  
 
Volume - 7,  Issue -  05,  May - 2024        
 
 
Available online on –   https://shikshansanshodhan.researchculturesociety.org/ 
Page 7 
 
 
Marriage versus Soccer: A Study of Gurinder Chadha’s Bend It 
Like Beckham 
 
Renu 
Assistant Professor, Department of English, Juhari Devi Girls’ P.G. College, Kanpur, India      & 
Research Scholar, Department of English, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Gorakhpur University, Gorakhpur, India 
Email – renu96626@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acclaimed filmmaker Gurinder Chadha is known for blending East and West in her diasporic films and Bend It 
Like Beckham (2002) is one of them. It focuses on the life of a young girl, Jesminder Bhamra or Jess, struggling to make 
a career in sports. Jess is depicted as a great fan of David Beckham and like him aspires to become a soccer player but 
there are many obstacles that she must overcome before she can fully realize her dream. Being born and brought up in 
a middle-class Punjabi immigrant family in London, England during 1980s, Jess is not allowed to make her own 
decisions. Her parents, as other members of the Punjabi immigrant community, place loads of importance on good career 
given that they immigrated to the foreign land seeking better opportunities both for themselves and their future 
generations but sports is never viewed by them as a career choice. 
Jess’s deep obsession with both soccer and Beckham is manifested, in the very beginning, through her 
daydreaming in which she sees herself playing soccer alongside her favorite Beckham. She is more or less a misfit 
within her own ethnic community not only because she does not look like other girls but also because unlike them, she 
loves to play soccer.  
Marriage and soccer are the two major themes running throughout the film. The clash between marriage and 
soccer parallels the clash between the two generations. Marriage is something which is viewed as highly sacred and 
essential part of life in Indian culture. Even for Indian immigrants, living away from their homeland, it continues to hold 
the same significance which often becomes a source of trouble for their children, especially when it is given more 
importance than career.  
The clash between the two begins when, one day, Juliette Paxton nicknamed Jules, a member of the Hounslow 
Harriers (a local women’s amateur football team), sees Jess playing in the park and is so impressed by her soccer skills 
that she invites her to try out for the team. Things go favorable for Jess and she joins the team along with winning the 
appreciation of the coach, Joe. She decides against sharing any news with her family, knowing well they will never 
support sports as a career. Her isolation within her family is often emphasized when we see her sharing her deepest 
thoughts and emotions with Beckham’s poster. Later, when her mother becomes aware of her playing soccer, she 
becomes furious. According to her playing in childhood is okay but not in adulthood and obviously never as a career. 
She tells Jess bluntly – “We never stop you from playing in childhood but no more football now.” She also asks, – 
“What family would want a daughter-in-law who can run around kicking football all day but can’t make round 
chapatis?” Here, Mrs. Bhamra is more concerned about fulfilling her daughter’s would be in-laws’ wishes rather than 
her daughter’s. Her husband, Mr. Bhamra, agrees with her saying– “Your mother is right, now you should start behaving 
like a girl.” This overwhelms her with frustration and emotions and she begins to think that her gender is working as an 
obstacle between her and soccer. If only she had been born a boy, her life would have been much easier plus no 
household chores. She feels desperate realizing that she herself has no control over her life affairs as she must go by the 
rules set up by her parents and even if she gets married, it would only mean that the power to control her life would be 
Abstract: Popular Indian origin filmmaker Gurinder Chadha is known for making films on the lives of Indian 
immigrants living in England. Some of her popular films includes, Bhaji on the Beach (1993), Bend it Like Beckham 
(2002), Bride and Prejudice (2004) etc. In most of her works Gurinder Chadha deals with the theme of women 
issues in both inner and outer space.  This research paper attempts to evaluate the issues that women face when 
they want to make a career in professional sport. Moreover, it will also highlight the conflict between the two-
immigrant generations in the film Bend it Like Beckham and how the first-generation immigrants use culture to 
dominate the second-generation immigrants.  
 
Keywords :  Women, Sports, Career, Culture, Marriage, Soccer, Gender, Patriarchy. 
DOIs:10.2018/SS/202405002                                        --:--                         Research Paper / Article  /  Review 
Shikshan Sanshodhan : Journal of Arts, Humanities and Social Sciences            ISSN(o): 2581-6241     
Monthly, Peer-Reviewed, Refereed, Indexed Journal                                              Impact Factor:  6.831                  
 
Volume - 7,  Issue -  05,  May - 2024        
 
 
Available online on –   https://shikshansanshodhan.researchculturesociety.org/ 
Page 8 
transferred from her parents to her husband. Likewise, in Andy Fickman’s She’s the Man Viola Hastings, the protagonist 
of the film, who plays soccer at her high school girls soccer team faces same difficulties and obstacles in her way to 
follow her passion of playing football. When her team was cut by the school authority, Viola and her teammates rushed 
to their coach and tried to join the boys’ team but the coach refused to take them in. Moreover, he said that “girls are 
not as fast as boys or strong or athletic.” Viola’s love and passion for soccer was similar to that of Jess. The same thought 
that Jess had, that if she had been born a boy her life would have been much easier, comes to Viola’s mind as well. Viola 
uses cross-dressing to transformed herself into “Sebastian” (her twin brother) to play in the boys’ team.  
It is not just the Indian parents but English parents too do not see sports as a good career choice for girls. Mrs. 
Paxton, Jules’s mother, did not like her daughter to play sports. She is of the view that playing sports will turn her 
daughter into a man. In her book Coming on Strong: Gender and Sexuality in Women’s Sport, Susan K. Cahn discussed 
the fear of people who see sports as a male realm, she said “women’s assumption of “the manly role” generated deep 
hostility and anxiety among those who feared that women’s athletic activity would damage female reproductive 
capacity, promote sexual licentiousness, and blur “natural” gender differences.”  Here, we can note that in spite of 
coming from entirely different cultural backgrounds the mothers of both the aspiring soccer players share the same 
anxiety that sport is, gradually, making them masculine. Mrs. Bhamra wants Jess to behave like a traditional Punjabi 
girl. Similarly, Mrs. Paxton wants her daughter to behave or act like a typical British girl. She wants to see her in girl’s 
clothing rather than in track suites and t-shirts, and indulge in activities that occupies most of the girls of her age like 
shopping, dating, cooking etc. The ideology of people like Mr. and Mrs. Bhamra and Mrs. Paxton unknowingly 
strengthens the domination of patriarchy in sports and weakens the women who want to participate in it. Their persistent 
emphasis on feminine attributes reveals their view on sports which contrasts highly with reality. They view sports as a 
masculine or manly thing where women have no role to play and if anything, women’s participation in sports only takes 
away the feminine attributes from them, making them unsuitable as a prospective bride. American feminist Judith Butler 
in her popular work Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (1990) gave the theory of gender 
performativity. According to her, there is no relation between gender and act. In other words, being born male or female 
does not determine behavior. Thus, both the mothers by forcing their daughters to give up soccer, thinking it as a 
masculine activity, and by asking them to behave according to socially and culturally constructed gender norms seem 
to contradict this theory.  
Women in general and mothers in particular constantly discourage their girls from participating in sports due to 
cultural factors. In Heroines of Sport: The Politics of Difference and Identity, Jennifer Hargreves states “a culture is 
remembered for its heroes and heroines, and sports constructs them and influences our perceptions of them continuously. 
In popular consciousness, heroes and heroines are men and women who are ‘larger than life’, ‘inspirational icons’, 
special people with extraordinary qualities that are constructed and represented in particular ways to encourage us to 
admire and idealize them. In other words, heroes and heroines are socially constructed through discourses and meanings 
and values that change over time. But heroes are more easily defined than heroines and there is greater social importance 
attributed to the production and celebration of male heroism.” But for men, who unlike women occupy the public space, 
as in the case of Mr. Bhamra it is the racial factor that prevents him to encourage his daughter to participate in sports.  
It is his own bitter experience of discrimination in sports that causes him to not allow his daughter to play as he does 
not want his daughter to experience the same.  
Jesminder continues to play even after her parents’ denial. She knows that they will never allow her to play so 
she decides to lie. This earns her an opportunity to continue her training session. As Pinky’s (Jess’s elder sister) wedding 
date comes close, Jess asks for money to buy a pair of sandals. This delights her mother who thinks that finally her 
daughter has started taking interest in normal things. But Jess uses the money to buy herself a pair of sports shoes instead 
of sandals. Jess’s constant lies, however unethical, apparently seems the only way to deal with her unsupportive parents 
until she gets a permission to play by her father.  
To conclude, it can be said that the women, who occupy the domestic space, expect their daughters to follow 
their path by faithfully living by the socially and culturally constructed gender roles. Both Jess and Jules are not 
supported by their mothers but only discouraged. Even Jess’s sister is unable to appreciate her soccer skills. On the other 
hand, the men in the film such as Mr. Bhamra, Joe, Mr. Paxton and Tony are portrayed in a more positive light by 
extending their support and encouragement to the girls whenever needed.   
 
REFERENCES : 
1. Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Routledge, 1990. 
2. Cahn, Susan K. Coming on Strong: Gender and Sexuality in Women’s Sport. University of Illinois Press, 2015.  
3. Chadha, Gurinder. Bend It Like Beckham. Fox Searchlight Pictures, 2002. 
4. Fickman, Andy. She’s the Man. Dreamworks Pictures, Paramount Pictures, 2006. 
5. Hargreves, Jennifer. Heroines of Sport: The Politics of Difference and Identity. Routledge, 2000. 
