sociological
review
polish
ISSN 1231 – 1413
2 178 12
(
)’
DURU ARUN KUMAR
Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology
Technology Growth in India—Some Important Concerns
Abstract: Technology has made its presence felt in various sectors of India’s development in the last twenty
years. Communication and information technology, manufacturing industry, transportation, defence and
space technologies are some of the important sectors which have incorporated modern technology in var-
ious aspects of their development and functioning. Also signiﬁcant and visible changes have taken place
in the consumer products available in the Indian market, most of them imported or locally manufactured
by multinational corporations based in India. Do these changes qualify India to be considered as a tech-
nologically advanced country, and thereby making technological changes an integral part of the social
change process of our society? Or are these developments restricted to certain elitist sections of society
with little or negligible trickle-down effect of the knowledge bases of the technology developments? In this
study a deconstructivist approach is adopted to analyse some of the processes involved in development
and diffusion of technology in a society. With the exception of mobile phone technology it is argued that
even though India has strong scientiﬁc and technological capabilities, it is emerging as a bigger consumer
of technology products than as a producer and innovator of modern technology.
Keywords: technology development, consumer market, mobile phones, education.
Technology in India
The Government of India, since its independence from British colonial rulers in 1947,
has supported and promoted science and technology through its various national poli-
cies. India was one of the ﬁrst countries to adopt a Science Policy Resolution in 1958,
which stated, “The key to national prosperity, apart from the spirit of the people,
lies, in the modern age, in the effective combination of three factors, technology, raw
materials and capital, of which the ﬁrst is perhaps the most important, since the cre-
ation and adoption of new scientiﬁc techniques can, in fact, make up for a deﬁciency
in natural resources, and reduce the demands on capital. But technology can only
grow out of the study of science and its applications.” As a result of this, a number
of science and technical educational and research institutes and laboratories were set
up on government initiative in different parts of India.1 Further, acknowledging the
widespread core competence and innovation in a number of areas in the country and
to make India a self dependent and advanced nation, the Technology Policy State-
ment, 1983 was introduced to give technological development a clear direction for
the growth of indigenous technology and the acquisition of technology from outside.2
1 http://www.dst.gov.in/stsysindia/spr1958.htm
2 http://www.dst.gov.in/stsysindia/sps1983.htm
296
DURU ARUN KUMAR
The Government of India constituted the Technology Development Board (TDB)
in September 1996, as per the provisions of the Technology Development Board Act,
1995. The Act enables creation of a Fund for Technology Development and Applica-
tion to be administered by TDB. The Fund receives grants from the Government of
India out of the Cess collected by the Government from industrial concerns under the
provisions of the Research and Development Cess Act, 1986, as amended in 1995.3
Thus it may be ascertained that there has been a consistent patronage and political
support for science and technology activities in India. This is also indicated by a huge
science and technology institutional structure and several programs created under
various government departments and ministries to promote and support research
and development in various ﬁelds such as Department of Science and Technology,
Department of Information Technology, Department of Electronics, Indian Space
Research Organization and several others.4
As a result of these sustained efforts through various funding schemes, signiﬁcant
progress has been made in certain technology sectors, particularly in strategic indus-
tries such as space sciences,5 nuclear technology, defence technology, aviation and
information technology. India’s defence research laboratories have successfully de-
veloped light combat aircraft, ballistic missiles, satellite communications and several
other technologies of strategic importance.
Looking at some of the examples mentioned above we notice that, most of these
developments are in highly specialised and niche areas, with long gestation periods
and far removed from scope for immediate application for direct public domain, but
have been internationally acclaimed. These ﬁelds are highly capital intensive and
depend on continuous government support.
Another important development has been that of IT and IT enabled services sec-
tors in India, recognised globally as highly competitive sectors. The IT-ITES industry
has two major components: IT Services and business process outsourcing (BPO). The
growth in the service sector in India has been led by the IT-ITES sector, contributing
substantially to the increase in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), employment, and ex-
ports. The sector has increased its contribution to India’s GDP from 1.2% in Financial
Year 1998 to 7.1% in Financial Year 2011.6
India’s progress in Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) is also
accompanied by many challenges. There is a perception that the Indian economy
as a whole has not beneﬁted from the ICT industry because of the high regional
concentration of ICT activity and low diffusion of ICT to other sectors of the economy.
A large part of the IT sector is involved in export-oriented services and products. It
helps provide employment and earns foreign revenue for India but adds limited value
3 http://www.dst.gov.in/stsysindia/sps1983.htm
4 http://www.tdb.gov.in/
5 National Centre for Astrophysics, a centre of the school of natural sciences of the Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research, has set up a unique facility, the Giant Meterwave Radio Telescope for radio
astronomical research at metre wavelengths. GMRT is a very versatile instrument for investigating a variety
of radio astrophysical problems ranging from nearby Solar system to the edge of observable Universe.
http://gmrt.ncra.tifr.res.in/
6 http://www.indianembassy.org/indiainfo/india_2000/chapters/chp07.pdf
TECHNOLOGY GROWTH IN INDIA—SOME IMPORTANT CONCERNS
297
addition to India’s technology requirements. The IT and ICT boom is visible only
in special regions and locations mostly in southern India, and the concentration of
skilled human resources in the IT and ICT sectors is adversely affecting other sectors
of the economy.7
Consumer Market
In the last few decades India has emerged as a huge consumer market. This can be
traced to a shift in the economic policy from socialist to market economy to tidy
over the Balance of Payment crisis in 1991. As a part of the bail out plan under the
International Monetary Fund, India made certain structural economic reforms. The
main thrust of the 1991 economic reforms in India was to allow for the operation
of a free market, where the forces of demand and supply could freely compete and
the local and the national economy could be integrated into the global economy
(Kothari 1997). The elaborate structure of licenses, controls and regulations was
abolished to help increase production, efﬁciency and demand and decrease prices.
Import restrictions were relaxed and steps were taken toward the liberalization of
foreign trade and investments, a reduction in custom duties, an increase in incentives
and policy changes to attract foreign capital. As a result of this there was an upsurge
in import of mass produced goods in the Indian markets.
A wide array of products such as foreign cars, televisions, electronics, washing
machines, air-conditioners, processed foods, perfumes, and other consumer goods,
became freely available and have become symbolic of new status-conscious Indians.
Incentive for industrial production has come primarily from these changing demands.
Thus as pointed by Kothari it is not the availability of essential commodities, improved
access and control over productive resources, low-cost and decentralized conventional
and alternative energy sources, but rather products and services that are mostly beyond
the means of the majority of the low income groups of people.
Even though a large number of imported consumer products are available in
the Indian markets, most do not cater to the essential needs requirement of the
poor people, there is an increasing demand for such products for different reasons.
There is ‘indigenization’ or ‘domestication’ of the meaning attached to possession
of these consumer products. It is considered as a symbol of higher status by the
bourgeoning urban middle class and those aspiring to higher social status. The concept
of domestication of foreign products and brands has been studied by other scholars
too. As pointed out by some, even the most ‘global’ brands, such as McDonald’s or
Coca-Cola, have different cultural connotations and are consumed quite differently
in different places.8 Arjun Appadurai argues that ‘as rapidly as forces from various
metropolises are brought into new societies, they tend to become indigenized in
7 http://www.nasscom.in/indian-itbpo-industry;
http://www.digital-review.org/uploads/ﬁles/pdf/2009-
2010/chap-21_india.pdf
8 Daniel Miller’s (1998) work on consumption practices in Trinidad and Marie Gillespie’s (1995) ethno-
graphic study of young Punjabis in Southall, West London are some of the examples of this ‘domestication’
of meaning.
298
DURU ARUN KUMAR
one way or another’ (Appadurai 1996: 32). The following years have seen most of
the imports and fresh investments in the productive economy oriented not toward
meeting the basic needs of a majority, but primarily toward satisfying the consumption
patterns of the elite.
Besides policies of free market economy adopted by India there has also been
a preference for imported products as they are believed to be of superior quality than
the locally manufactured ones. Except where it is entirely unavoidable, as pointed out
in a vision document, Indian administrators (whether in the public or in the private
sector) avoid local designs. They consider that well-worn imported designs alone are
risk free. For instance, it is the ofﬁcial policy in the Department of Telecommunica-
tions (and in others too) not to procure any equipment unless it has been used for
a minimum of two years. As a result, Indian designs face a Catch-22 situation: They
will not be accepted unless they have been in use, and they cannot be in use until they
are tried out! (Indiresan 2001)
As a result of the above developments, even though there is a large inﬂux of
technology products available in Indian markets for a price, it is not clear that they
play a role in India’s technological capacity building. Do they fulﬁl the technological
needs of the society at large in a equitable and inclusive manner? We illustrate our
point by discussing the revolution caused by the introduction of mobile technology in
India in the last two decades.
Mobile Phones
Mobile phones are the ﬁrst form of electronic communication technology to be widely
used in India. Since mobile networks are cheaper to build than landline networks, and
communication by phone does not require literacy, mobile phones are now increas-
ingly adopted in regions with no extensive prior form of communication technology.
The rate of mobile phone sales in India has been phenomenal ever since the introduc-
tion of mobile technology in 1995. With a subscriber base of more than 851 million,
the Mobile telecommunications system in India is the second largest in the world and
it was thrown open to private players in the 1990s.9 According to the International
Data Corporation’s Q3 2011 Mobile Phone Tracker release, the Indian Mobile phone
market grew 12% in units shipped, over the previous quarter, to clock 47.07 million
units.10 According to a market survey company, mobile user base had increased to
407 million users by 2011. And interestingly it also claims that there has been higher
increase in penetration and tele-density in the rural mobile connections compared to
urban India.11
Modern media communication technologies have been developed and essentially
tailored to fulﬁl the needs of the high-income, literate people of the developed coun-
tries. According to some studies, “…technologies… are a part of a matrix of global
9 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communications_in_India
10 http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prIN23230811
11 http://indiatechonline.com/juxtconsult-india-mobile-phones-study-2011-545.php
TECHNOLOGY GROWTH IN INDIA—SOME IMPORTANT CONCERNS
299
relations that has historically placed the developing world in a derivative relationship”
(Kavoori and Chaddha 2007: 227). This relationship has been reiterated in earlier his-
tories, of television, radio, newspaper and the Internet (Kavoori and Chaddha 2001).
Cell phone is also one of them. Since introduction of mobile phones in the Indian
market it has found many users for many reasons. As pointed out by these stud-
ies, a majority of low-income, low-literacy populations have a ﬂuid and temporary
identity. They lack any form of permanent identiﬁcation and are under the radar of
governmental and institutional surveillance. For a migrant population, the mobile
phone could even be their only ﬁxed point of reference. Further it is observed that,
the so-called emerging market has by-passed technological, physical, educational,
amongst other barriers to creatively use mobile phones to uplift themselves.
Mobile telephony like cinema, in an earlier era, seems to be a great social leveller.
Further, mobile technology probably helps rural farmers decide which market to go
to sell their produce at the highest possible price. Even in the case of the urban
poor such as craftsmen—electricians, plumbers etc.—the mobile phone directly gives
them access to customers. Previously they were dependent on contractors and shop-
keepers to point them to work. Now they can function independently as free lancers
and peddle their skills without relying exclusively on contractors and shop-keepers
who have land lines and were the only means of contact between the craftsman and
his customer. All this is a direct result of the easy availability of mobile phones. So it is
not at all surprising that India is emerging as one of the biggest consumers of mobile
telephony.
Discussion
Looking at the various government policy measures with regard to science and tech-
nology we may argue that a technologically deterministic approach is adopted on the
belief that based on the developed countries’ model, introduction of science and tech-
nology institutions can bring about growth of science and technology. Government
legitimated its policies in terms of the technological imperative. It was implied that
by supporting important technology areas of research there will be a trickle down
effect that will eventually lead to technological development of the society at large.
However the advanced technology efforts have remained conﬁned to areas sponsored
by government funding and infrastructural support.
While on the one hand, there are regions in India which are called ’cybercities’
and ’silicon valleys’ of India with state of the art technology development centres
in Information Technology (Kalra 2006), on the other hand, a large part of India’s
population lives in poverty and remains untouched and unaware of these technol-
ogy achievements. There are several regions which do not have access to electricity,
potable drinking water and basic health facilities. Provision of these basic facilities
would probably require a small fraction of the budget spent on the so called so-
phisticated technology development programmes. How do we reconcile India being
a technologically advanced nation on the one hand, while on the other, more than
300
DURU ARUN KUMAR
thirty percent of its population lives in poverty with no access to basic amenities for
a digniﬁed life?
The consumer markets ruled by free market-forces, have been inundated with
secondary goods, with a higher proﬁt margin and catering to the middle and upper
classes of the country. Among these, mobile phones are one of the few imported
technologies which have found ready acceptance by the rich and the poor alike because
of its small size, portability, user-friendly features, affordability and most importantly,
fulﬁlling a need caused by increasing urbanization and migration of people in search
of livelihood and absence of any reliable and affordable means of communication
available to people based in underdeveloped parts of India. However a large number
of mobile phone users in non urban areas use it only for basic communication and
are not able to use several other features such as text messaging and Internet access
because literacy rates in these areas is very low. Poor infrastructure and erratic or no
power supply create other logistics problems. Lack of English language knowledge
also poses limitations to their optimum use.
Exploring the complexities in what she calls “schizophrenic India”, Rama Bi-
japurkar suggests that “the holy grail of the Indian market lies in understanding its
plurality” (Bijapurkar 2007). India is not one homogenous society, but a collection
of many different communities deﬁned by language religion and ethnicity, each with
its distinctive cultural ethos, social pattern, and demography. To be successful in the
Indian market, it is not sufﬁcient to create ‘no-frills’ cheaper versions of feature-
rich expensive products but to invest effort in understanding use requirements and
developing appropriate models (Bijapurkar 2001).
The current experiences have shown that people who don’t use ICTs are willing to
accept technology and put in the effort to learn to use it. But for the products to become
successful, they must be designed to suit the users’ real needs.12 India presents several
obstacles for widespread adoption of information and communication technologies,
but perhaps the most persistent problem of all has proved to be the problem of
text input in Indian languages.13 Computer usage in India has been almost entirely in
English and is restricted to the English-speaking, upper-class and middle-class people.
12 International and national standardization bodies such as ISO, UNICODE, World-wide-Web
consortium (W3C) and BIS (Bureau of Indian Standards) to ensure adequate representation of
(http://tdil.mit.gov.in/) Technology Development for Indian Languages (TDIL) Programme initiated by
the Department of Electronics & Information Technology (DEIT), Ministry of Communication
13 Technology Development for Indian Languages (TDIL) Programme initiated by the Department of
Electronics & Information Technology (DEIT), Ministry of Communication & Information Technology
(MC&IT), Govt. of India has the objective of developing Information Processing Tools and Techniques to
facilitate human-machine interaction without language barrier; creating and accessing multilingual knowl-
edge resources; and integrating them to develop innovative user products and services. The Programme also
promotes Language Technology standardization through active participation in & Information Technology
(MC&IT), Govt. of India has the objective of developing Information Processing Tools and Techniques to
facilitate human-machine interaction without language barrier; creating and accessing multilingual knowl-
edge resources; and integrating them to develop innovative user products and services. The Programme
also promotes Language Technology standardization through active participation in International and
national standardization bodies such as ISO, UNICODE, World-wide-Web consortium (W3C) and BIS
(Bureau of Indian Standards) to ensure adequate representation of Indian languages in existing and future
language technology standards (http://tdil.mit.gov.in/).
TECHNOLOGY GROWTH IN INDIA—SOME IMPORTANT CONCERNS
301
Mobile phones have recently proved to be an exception to this rule, with a signiﬁcant
number of models becoming available in Indian languages, however text entry in
Indian languages continues to be a rare phenomenon.
Important sectors such as manufacturing technologies, infrastructure develop-
ment, electronics and power generation industry have made signiﬁcant progress with
regard to scale of production, quality and competitiveness, but the most frequently
voiced concerns relate to lack of skilled manpower and poor infrastructure, specially,
power shortages in the country, as important limiting factors in their progress.
As of 2011, there are 1522 degree-granting engineering colleges in India with an
annual student intake of 582,000, plus 1,244 polytechnics with an annual intake of
265,000. However, these institutions face shortage of faculty and concerns have been
raised over the quality of education14 (Mitra 2008).
According to industry estimates “only a quarter of all graduates are employable
and about 80% of job seekers in employment exchanges are without any professional
skills. India is suffering from a massive shortage of skilled manpower” (Duggal 2005).
But employability here refers to the management skills in marketing, ﬁnance and
operations, and not technology and engineering skills, as is apparent from this report
which pointed out, “Businesses in India have started spreading their tentacles in
towns, cities and semi urban areas in search of newer markets. These are seen as
future markets for telecommunications, FMCG and retail sector among others. As
companies expand their operations, they are not ﬁnding enough trained people to ﬁt
into different positions” (Duggal 2005). Further it reports, “Retail, insurance, ﬁnance
industry are booming. The recently released KPMG report on retailing in the country
titled as ‘Consumer Markets in India, the next big thing?’ has revealed that plans are
up for at least 150 new shopping malls by 2008. Also, the number of department stores
has been growing at 24% annually. Such growth would again aggravate the demand
for trained man power in organised sectors dramatically.”
Following the services sector concentration, consumer services have been a focus
area for the Business schools which include ﬁnancial, banking, retail, consulting,
telecom, InfoTech etc.
Because of the increase in the jobs available in the service sector many young
engineering graduates prefer to join non technical service oriented and managerial
jobs. As a result of this manufacturing industries and other technology sectors are
not able to get technically qualiﬁed manpower. More than 90% of the engineering
graduates prefer to join management professions (Arun-Kumar 2008).
How does this state of affairs impact the technology development in India? On the
one hand we have a large infrastructure to support science and technology education
and research activities. We also have an ever increasing demand for growth of various
industrial sectors. But on the other hand, there is a steady decline of a willing and
technically qualiﬁed manpower because of preference for lucrative jobs in the service
sector. This problem is further compounded by the poor quality of technical and engi-
neering education in many privately funded engineering colleges due to lack of good
14 SPECIAL REPORT: THE EDUCATION RACE, by Newsweek, August 18–25, 2011 issue.
302
DURU ARUN KUMAR
teaching faculties and infrastructural support. At the same time due to increasing in-
vestment in the market economy the demand for the service sector and management
professional has increased manyfold with the corresponding disenchantment with the
core technical jobs. Science and technology qualiﬁed manpower forms the backbone
of this sector. In the absence of this it may be challenging for India to sustain a broad
based technological development, and subsequently to become an integral part of
social change. This needs to be explored further with respect to different technology
sectors in India with the help of empirical studies.
References
A r u n - K u m a r, Duru. 2008. “Impact of Globalization on Core Engineering Education in India,” Per-
spectives in Global Development and Technology, Volume 7, no. 1: 55–68.
A p p a d u r a i, Ahmad. 1996. Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press.
A p p a d u r a i, Ahmad and B r e c k e n r i d g e, C. A. 1995. “Public modernity in India,” in: C. A. Brecken-
ridge (ed.), Consuming Modernity: Public Culture in a South Asian World. Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, pp. 1–20.
B i j a p u r k a r, Rama. 2001. “New Markets, New Rules,” Business World, 30th July.
B i j a p u r k a r, Rama. 2007. We Are Like that Only. India: Penguin Books.
D u g g a l, Sanjeev. 2005. “Is lack of talent pool affecting India Inc’s growth? ‘India is suffering from
a real shortage of manpower’,” Posted online: Friday, November 04, 2005, The Financial Express
(http://www.ﬁnancialexpress.com/old/fe_full_story.php, content_id=107542).
G i l l e s p i e, Marie. 1995. Television, Ethnicity and Cultural Change. New York: Routledge.
I n d i r e s a n, P. V. 2001. “Technology Policy in a vision for the Future,” http://planningcommission.nic.in/
reports/sereport/ser/vision2025/tech.pdf (accessed 23.5.2012).
J a c k s o n, Peter. 2004. “Local Consumption Cultures in a Globalizing World,” Transactions of Institute of
British Geography, NS 29: 165–178.
J o s h i, Anirudha [et al.]. 2008. “Rangoli: A Visual Phonebook for Low-literate Users” [Conference] //
Mobile HCI 2008.
K a l r a, R., 2006, “High Technology and Urban Development in Bangalore,” GeoJournal Library, Vol-
ume 86: 71–81.
K a v o o r i, Anandan and K a l y a n i, Chaddha. 2007. “Cell Phones as a Cultural Technology, Lessons from
the Indian Case,” in: A. Kavoori and N. Arceneaux, The Cell Phone Reader, Langenscheidt Pub.
Group.
K o t h a r i, Smitu. 1997. “Whose Independence? The Social Impact of Economic Reform in India,” Journal
of International Affairs 51.1: 85. Global Issues In Context. Web. 4 Feb. 2012.
K u m a r, Anshuman Holambe et al. 2011. “Saral: Devanagari Text Input System in Mobile Phones,”
E-Book, Freetechbooks.com.
M a n z a r, Osama and K a z i, Syed S. 2009–2010, in: India, Digital Review of Asia Paciﬁc. India: Sage
Publications, pp. 192–200.
M i l l e r, D. 1998. “Coca-Cola: A Black Sweet Drink from Trinidad,” in D. Miller (ed.), Material Cultures:
Why Some Things Matter. London: UCL Press, pp. 169–87.
M i t r a, Sramana, 2008. “How To Save The World’s Back Ofﬁce,” Forbes, 03.14.08.
Biographical Note: Duru Arun Kumar is a faculty in Sociology of Science (Ph.D) at Netaji Subhas Institute
of Technology, New Delhi, India. Her areas of interest are Higher Technical Education, Globalization, and
Science and Technology Research.
Address: Netaji Subhas Institute of Technology, New Delhi, India; E-mail: duruarun@rediffmail.com
