1 
 Graduate School Statement of Purpose  
 
Task:   Please write a short essay (500 to 1,000 words) about yourself and your interest in 
science. You do not need to write about astronomy or space, and you are encouraged to 
be creative. If you wish, you can say something about topics in astronomy that are of 
particular interest to you. Your essay is an important part of your application and will be 
read carefully.  
 
 
In my family  there is a tradition  of interest in science: m y grandmother was 
college professor in chemistry and physics,  and b oth my parents  were trained as 
mechanical engineers  in college . When I was a kid, my mom showed  me a box full of 
extremely tiny gears  – those th at table clocks are made out of  – and told me what each 
part was for, and  I remember  thinking ―this is the coolest thing I’ve ever seen!‖  I have 
been interested in mechanical structures and the inner working of human -made and 
natural things ever since.  
My interest in natural structures and systems  began with photography.  I find it an 
almo st magical  technique  of preserving any natural phenomenon  from large to small . It 
also gives me a chance to look at things  very closely  and wonder  about them for as long 
as I like . I took photograph s extensively when I travelled in China, and later in my first 
year of college.  My interests intensified  and went beyond just apparent forms, when 
during my first summer in college I read abou t linear and nonlinear dynamics, emergence 
behavior , game theory , neuroscience  and spatio -temporal pattern formation  in books 
intended for undergraduate students  or the general public . I decide d that my appreciation 
for nature would only deepen and advance if I learn ed about the underlying theory of the 
nature of beauty , instead of just the beauty itself. I’m also more and more convinced that 
we can gain insights into the very large structure s in our universe by looking at smaller 
structures like cellular pathways  or subatomic particles.   
In order to understand the physical world further, I enrolled in both physics and 
mathematics program s. Even w ith the strong theoretical emphasis in my curriculum 
choice, I still find physica lly touching,  seeing and  manipulating things among the best 
ways to understand them.  I enjoy doing lab work s in physics, and I have worked in a 
machine shop , sculpture studio , art museum , and taxidermy studio . However , the 
elegance , simplicity , and power  of theory  are even more appealing  to me as a scientist . 
As I acquire more and more background in mathematics, I realize what a powe rful 
language and metaphor it is to science. I enjoy engaging myself in philosophical 
arguments  about the na ture of mathematics and physics with my physics and astronomy 
professor Dr. Robert Harmon and my best friend  in college  who is a neuroscience studen t.  
My research project last summer was on an eclipsing binary  star system, LV 
Hercules, which has high orbit eccentricity. From the beginning of the project, I was very 
enthusiastic about teaching myself observational astronomy from scratch. The project 
was sponsored by the Arkansas Center for Space & Planetary Scien ces at the University 
of Arkansas, a new research center consisting of mechanical engineers, chemical 
engineers, astronomers, biologists and cosmologists. I enjoyed the interdisciplinary group 
dynamics during weekly seminars, while at the same time working  in the physics 2 
 research building, where I could  talk to other physicists about their work on material 
science, numeric and computation, or quantum optics.  
During the  process of  learn ing about the universe  – seeing, touching, 
exper imenting, thinking , and researching --I also  have  learn ed about myself.  I find the 
only way I can learn anything meaningful is to ask ―why, ‖ which is the central thread of 
any inquiry  – experimental , theoretical, philosophical or intellectual . I always try to find 
the boundary to the chain of knowledge or reasoning. For example, in the world of 
astrophysics, I find the jets from black holes  and pulsars interesting , I find cosmic 
background radiation interesting,  and I find the origin of universe  intriguing , since we do 
not know how these phenomena have come into being.  
My l iberal art education  also has provided me inspiration and reflection on 
science education . Having f ound  that college science  outreach  consist s almost entirely of 
cool demonstration s of scientific phenomenon, I trie d to create another area of interest in 
science  and scientific thinking , by demonstrating the power of reasoning, logic and 
critical thinking. That was the main objective when I gathered students and facult y 
members  and created the Freethinkers Club on campus last fall. We discussed the 
teaching of the theory of evolution in public school s, and  pseudoscien tific influence in  
public policy making . We tripled the size of our mailing list after just one semester.  
  The l iberal arts approach give s me opportunities to explore all these different 
experiences and ways of learning.  I want to continue exploring the beauty and elegance 
of our universe in my life, my studies, and my career. For me, seeking out an d 
understa nding such mysteries —large and small —is like discovering and collecting jewels, 
or something even more elegant, like th e tiny gears of a mechanical clock.    
 
 
 
 